# Writing and Talking

Over the years I've wrote and talked about a number of things, mostly
technical. I haven't been very careful about keeping an index of these things,
since to me they feel like a kind of rocket exhaust. Anyhow.

## Writings

### "Build Good Software: Of Politics and Methods"

I wrote this essay in 2017 to accompany a keynote I was invited to give at
Lambda Days. I think a good deal of the software industry is dominated by a kind
of unreflective techno-utopianism which I find to be both deleterious to the
public good and harmful to the process of becoming good at writing software as a
civilization. There are seeds in this work of my later interest in communal
anti-mammon Christian social thought, though I didn't really have a sense of
this at the time of writing. That would only come after a serious reading of
Pr. Dietrich Bonhoeffer's
["Nachfolge"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Cost_of_Discipleship).

Anyhow, the essay is still something that I'm proud of and I'd probably approach
it in a broadly similar fashion today.

You can read it online [here](https://blog.troutwine.us/2017/02/10/build-good-software/)

### "Hands-On Concurrency with Rust"

This is my first book for Packt. You can find it
[here](https://www.packtpub.com/product/hands-on-concurrency-with-rust/9781788399975). I
wrote about the process of writing it
[here](https://blog.troutwine.us/2018/06/07/hands-on-concurrency-with-rust/),
why and how I did it. Fun project.

### "Systems Programming for Normal People"

This is my in-progress book for No Starch press. The idea is to introduce
systems programming for practicing software engineers that may not have had
opportunity to work down-stack but would like an inroads. I am also trying to
orient the book toward what I see as the reality of systems programming today:
migration of complex kernel workflows into a hybrid userspace model,
minimization of memory copies, containerization and distribution.

## Talks

### The Charming Genius of the Apollo Guidance Computer

This is probably my most watched talk. I had previously spoken at Erlang Factory
conferences on, well, Erlang things and was invited by the Code Mesh folks to
let loose a little. I was very interested in the hardware of the Apollo project
at the time -- as a result of David Mindell's "Digital Apollo" book -- and spoke
about the architecture of the Apollo guidance computer, a quirky little machine
even for the time. There are some factual errors in the talk but overall I'm
still a fan. London is quite a bit around the world from Berkeley, California
and I was _very_ tired. I've subsequently learned how to hide my notes from the
audience, allowing me to avoid weird little goofs, but I hadn't hit on them here
yet. Ah well, such is the peril of live performance. Amusingly this is one of
the few talks I've given twice and the second time I _had_ hit on my note method
but the secondary screen failed, denying me my notes yet again.

You can view this talk
[online](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xY45YE7ggng). The second version is
[here](https://systemswe.love/videos/the-charming-genius-of-the-apollo-guidance-computer).

### Getting Uphill on a Candle: Crushed Spines, Detached Retinas and One Small Step

This is my favorite talk I've ever given. In 40 minutes I give a history of
aeronautics from the Wright Brothers' flight through to the Moon landing. I
recall my goal at the time was to describe how long-term technological change
happens -- something I'm very interested in -- as well as push just how much
information I could deliver to an audience in one sitting. If I remember
correctly there are some 200 slides in the talk, so it's more like a very slow
animation. You can view this talk
[online](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3lMYbkqPWFE).

I later gave a [PechaKucha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PechaKucha) variant of
this talk, but not in public.

### Build Good Software: Of Politics and Methods

More detail in [this section](#build-good-software-of-politics-and-methods).

You can view this talk
[online](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fdO4VN1IDI0&list=PLPzMpGTwiBD0TBDW2oMefYg99g46TG1w5&index=9).

### Why Things Fail

[Bruce Tate](https://twitter.com/redrapids) and I were doing a video series for
a while called "Why Things Fail". One of my research interests is the failure of
complex systems and this series is me and Bruce having a conversation about one
serious failure in-depth. We've recorded three videos so far. We had planned to
talk about the [Dust Bowl](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dust_Bowl) but that got
interrupted.

  * [Why Things Fail: The Bug Heard 'round the World](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9CsMW1pJmpI)
  * [Why Things Fail: The Great Molasses Flood of 1919](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OiTHSEYvWEs)
  * [Why Things Fail (and what we can do about it)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hco91AtgFTA)
